# Possible projects to investigate

The eligible projects could tackle any of the following themes:

1. Network modeling
2. Biophysics
3. Neuromodulation
4. Robustness
5. ML / SBI modeling
6. Meta-learning with Tim (and all the others ofc)

## Degeneracy

1. Redundancy in reaction networks: the machinery underlying synaptic
   plasticity (everything really) is composed of hundreds of different
   molecules. The emerging target dynamics, however, exhibit a surprisingly
   simple and intuitive behaviour (hebbian learning, monotonic frequency
   dependence). Is, therefore, the total reaction network the result of an
   amazingly intricate optimization process or is its complexity aimed at
   providing a sufficient degree of robustness to perturbations?

2. Genetic algorythms and redundancy (more theoretical): can we investigate how
   parameter degeneracy survives genetic optimization?

3. Any small model: what are the parameter degeneracies in a 2 layer perceptron?
   How is this invariance impacted by different non linearities?
   How do they translate in better accuracy or faster training times? Are they
   correlated to a network robustness in respect to input perturbations?

4. **What is the relationship between degeneracy and model structural identifiability?**

Questions about Deistler et al. 2022 PNAS:

1. *We note that this power-based energymeasure likely underestimates the true energy consumption* - Should it not overestimate? You are considering V * I = g * V^2 = W, which is true if the whole potential is generated by your ion. **I have to read the paper Moujahid et al. 2011 Phis Rev E.**
2. If we reduced the model to render it fully identifiable, could we have found simple functional relationships between the degrees of freedom and energy efficiency?

## Meta-Learning

1. Additional refinement: the filtering rules proposed in Confavreaux et al.
   2024 are predominantly structural: well defined rates (stability), realistic
   weight change, "smoothness" of dynamics (Fano factor and CV),
   non-asynchronicity (**non-epilepsy**).
   No rules, however, impose any encoding property on the network. "Goodness of
   encoding" metrics can be applied on the resulting ~6000 rules to assess how
   well the resulting connectivity is able to perform given some task. Also, it
   would be interesting to understand which metrics are equivalent.
   An additional rule can be taken from Kuzmina et al. 2024.

## SSM (spectral submanifolds)

Summary statistics and dimensionality reduction

1. SSM: it looks great and I think one really needs to study it (George Haller
   lab ETH, in particular Marraffa A. and Prof. Mante V.  for neuroscientific
   applications on RNNs).

2. SSM can provide simplified target trajectories for SBI

3. SSM can be used to analyze the learning trajectories of DL models during
   training.

# Medical

1. From pyloric circuit of C. borealis to heart energy optimization? Does it make sense? We have kind of understood everything about the heart by now so maybe the only perspective is finding some alterations in the reduced dynamics to use instead of ECG - latent Brugata syndrome? In Melo et al. 2023 PNAS Nexus, they obtain a 0.93 AUC. Also, they do not seem to use a RNN. Can we try the **reparametrization** trick
